>> Kyle Simpson: In terms of our AJAX
function, there are two techniques for
how we could specialize it.
One of those techniques is
called partial application, so
let's look at partial application.
Here's my AJAX function, line 1.
Line 3, I am making a partial
application of the AJAX function,
and that result is getCustomer.
And the way that I have made
getCustomer out of AJAX,
is by pre-specifying the customer
API URL as its first input.
So envision a utility called partial,
which I'm not gonna show
the implementation of because it doesn't
really matter how its implemented, but
it's provided to you by all
the functional libraries.
It takes a function is its first input,
and then it takes as its next
inputs a set of arguments to pass
along to that function at some point.
So it's like pre setting those arguments,
and
we get back a new function
called getCustomer.
I can take line 4,
another parcel of AJAX and
provide it to inputs, and
get me a getCurrentUser.
But line 5 is better than line 4, for the
exact same reason is we just talked about.
Line 5 makes a more clear
delineation of the relationship
between getCurrentUser and getCustomer.
That is getCurrentUser is a partial
application of getCustomer.
>> Kyle Simpson: So though that partial
utility allows me each time I call it to
preset one or more inputs, and
produce a function which is expecting
all the rest of the inputs.
That's what partial application is.
>> Kyle Simpson: Partially
applying some of the inputs now,
receiving all of the inputs later.
You'll notice that to do a two-stage
specialization like I did,
I had to call partial twice.
Do you see that?
I had to call partial once, and
then I called it the second time
to make the getCurrentUser.
>> Kyle Simpson: That's one
way of doing specialization,
it's called partial application.
Another way which quite frankly is much
more common within programme functioning.
You will tend to want to do partial
application as you get started, and
then you'll find out actually
everybody does currying, okay?
And you'll see why as you go along, as we
go along in the course and as you get more
practice with this, but currying is the
much more common form of specialization.
I used to tell people and
many people have said this before,
I used to tell people that currying was
a special form of partial application.
I now would describe
them more like cousins.
They both accomplish the same end goal,
they both specialize a generalized
function, but they go about it in
a somewhat significantly different way.
So let's look at currying.
Back to our AJAX function, what if I
wrote the AJAX function like this, okay?
It looks a little bit different
because I have this three levels here.
I have an AJAX level, and then a getData
level, and then a getCallback level, so
I've got three levels
of function going on.
And notice line 7 when I call it,
I'm doing a first set of
parentheses line 7 for the CUSTOMER_API,
that provides the URL.
And I get back another function
which is expecting the next input.
And then I get back another function
You see where I'm going here?
So I've got three functions nested, and
then I've got three function calls.
That's what I would sort of refer
to as a manual currying, okay?
And you'll sometimes see people define,
if they just have a two or maybe a three
level currying, you'll see them list
out the functions nested like that.
On the next slide we'll see an alternate
way of writing out a manual curry.
But that allows me then to
call those functions and
save off the intermediate function.
That's how we get the specialization.
If I call AJAX with only CUSTOMER_API,
I get back a function which
could be called getCustomer.
The function on line 2 is
essentially getCustomer.
Use your equational reasoning and you'll
see they're basically the same thing.
And then if I call
the getCustomer with the data,
what I get back is getCurrentUser.
So, you'll see the same specialization
just as we're doing on the previous slide,
but now notice that I didn't have
to call a utility every line.
All I had to do to get
the more specialized function,
was just parse in the next input.
Parse in an input,
get a more specialized function.
Parse in another input,
get an even more specialized function.
And you keep doing that, you keep getting
a more specialized function every time.
>> Kyle Simpson: This is
a technique called currying.
Where does that come from by the way?
The Haskell programming language,
everybody knows or
probably has heard at some point or
another about Haskell.
I don't really know anything
at all about Haskell.
I can literally write one line of Haskell,
that's all I know about
the programming language Haskell.
But what I know is that
one of the co-inventors
of Haskell, his name was Haskell Curry.
He invented this technique of currying, or
at least co-invented this
technique of currying.
We call it currying because
it is essentially the way
that all inputs go into
functions in Haskell.
So in Haskell you don't write like
a binary or an unary function,
there is no such thing.
All functions are unary in Haskell.
So, if you wanna pass in three inputs,
what do you do?
You have a curried function
that takes them one at a time.
There's no such thing as parse in
all three all at once kind of thing.
So, currying comes from this idea of,
if I could only parse in in one input at
a time, how could I make multiple
inputs go into a function?
Sometimes my function
needs multiple inputs.
Now, this is doing it manually,
but it would be nice if, for
example, we had a utility
that could do that for us.
And indeed, we do have a utility
that can do that for us.
By the way in the comments in lines,
you will notice that I'm reusing
the arrow function syntax.
Line 1 is the traditional
way that is written out, and
that you will see a URL and
then the fat URL.
Let me highlight this for
you, you'll see URL here.
>> Kyle Simpson: My highlighter
will ever work, there we go.
URL, and then the arrow, and then data,
and then an arrow, and then cb,
and then an arrow, and then whatever the
function needs to do to do its work, okay?
That's that three level nesting,
it's just written all in one line.
And a lot of functional programmers
really like the arrow function syntax,
because this arrow function syntax is
almost identical to the mathematical
notation and the Haskell notation for
a curried function.
That's why they love
writing it in that style.
I am decidedly not a fan
of aero function syntax,
which is why you haven't seen any
arrow functions on any of my slides.
I'm not a fan of that syntax,
but if you absolutely must do
this chained arrow currying thing,
please do line 2.
Do a favor to the reader and at least wrap
parentheses around each function boundary.
Just slightly more not so
crazy on the readability, okay?
If I can't convince you not to do nested
arrow functions, please at least wrap your
arrow functions in parentheses, your
nested arrow functions in parentheses.
Okay, arrow functions aside,
in Javascript we can define a utility,
and indeed all functional libraries
will provide you a utility.
It's often called curry, sometimes they'll
have a variation of it called curry n,
meaning how many I wanna curry.
It looks like this.
You call curry, you tell it how many
inputs you're expecting to receive,
and then you provided a function.
And notice that this function here
doesn't have to be manually curried,
it's a regular old normal function that's
expecting some n number of inputs.
This curry utility automatically
adapts it into being that
unrolled thing that's going to
accept one input at a time.
>> Kyle Simpson: In other words,
it creates a wrapper adapted function,
whose job is to keep returning a new
function that expects another input,
until you've provided
the specified number of inputs.
And then it calls the underlying function
with all those collected inputs.
And that gives us the ability in line
7 to call AJAX with the URL, and
get back a getCustomer function.
And then call getCustomer with
a data object, and get back or
getCurrentUser function.